Hey friends, we have a
new sponsor today, and I
want to make sure that
you support them because they
make Hansel minutes possible. Raven
DB, it's a document database
that's non-relational and fully transactional.
It's available for windows and
Linux with official client API
APIs for.net, the JVM go
Ruby, no JS and Python.
Raven DB is designed for
high performance handling tens of
thousands of requests, even on
a single node. Now, Raven
DB is capable of on
the fly optimization, dynamic indexes,
and much more. It has
a fully loaded gooey, which
means it's simpler to operate
and you don't need, you
know, arcane incantations on the
command line. It just works.
It's fast and it's right.
Download your free community edition@ravendb.net.
That's R a V E
N db.net. I hope you
check it out.  Scott
Hanselman. This is another episode
of Hansel minutes today. I'm
talking with Mark Rendell. We
you're talking about the rise
of global developer tools. How
are you, sir? I'm very
well, thank you for asking,
you know, I'm sitting here
looking at a Dropbox folder
that I made many, many,
many years ago and it's
called utils and it used
to be C colon backslash
utils and now it's C
colon drop box utils and
it's just full of a
bunch of crap that I've
been carrying around with me
for many, many years. I
put it in my path
and it's all of my
developer utilities and I thought
I was quite clever. Yeah,
I'm I'm really old. So
I remember back in the
day, working on Unix systems
and you would have a
bin folder in your use
directory in your home directory,
and you would add that
to your pile. So then
anything that you found yourself
doing a lot, you just
write a quick colon shell
script back in those days
to repeat that for you.
So it sounds like I've
got history. I've got history
to back me up that
this was, was a good
idea for a period of
time as a developer. Absolutely.
It was very kind of
clunky sticks and sell a
tape and string way of,
of building your own toolkit
and carrying around with you.
Well, now I've got Uber
Boone to on windows 10
and I just do like
apt get install, or if
I'm running, you know, other
operating systems, I might say
yum, or on windows, I
could also use the chocolatey
tool, but these aren't really
for developer tools per se,
right? Why, why are we
separating developer tools from operating
system installation stuff? So writing
something to go on apt
gets or a Oh, yum
or Homebrew or any of
those things, or submitting something
to chocolate is quite complicated.
And you've to distribute Something
that is executable and something
that's executable on everybody's system.
So most of those things
are written in C or
C plus plus or rust,
or maybe go these days.
You can assume when developers
are looking to use your
tools, if I'm writing a
tool for a node, then
it seems fairly safe to
assume that I, the developers
that are going to be
using that have got node
installed. So you can just
target node and deploy an
NPM package, and then they
can use that. And you
don't have to worry about
runtimes and executability and all
that sort of stuff. Okay.
So are you saying that
in no developer in the
course of their natural development
of whatever there happened to
be writing might want something
that will support their development
process. And since we already
know that they're using node
and really that they can't
use anything else, because they're
going to be using the
node package installation process, we'll
just support them by allowing
them to arbitrarily bring in
other kind of like sidecar
tools that can sit alongside
their development plans. Yeah. I
mean, TypeScript TypeScript has grown
way beyond Microsoft and way
beyond being a visual studio
plugin. So the primary way
that TypeScript is distributed is
as an MPM package. And
do you do NPM install
minus G TypeScript, and it
puts the TypeScript compiler onto
your system and adds a
TSC command line tool that
you can then use in
any directory and compile your
TypeScript. And there's, you know,
that's just one example. There
are hundreds of these things,
Webpack and SAS, and
all sorts of things distributed
all through NPM JS Said,
that's amazing though, that using
note as an example, that
NPM has become such a,
I mean, it's its own,
like you said, after apt
get of its own. And
we're looking at numbers that
are unconscionable of TypeScript is
getting, you know, 3 million weekly
downloads, you know, 12 million a
month. Yes. That's amazing. It
is nuts. And the really
nice thing with that is
the people who are writing
software, using node and who
think I need a utility
to do something. They can
write that utility using the
language that they know, they
don't have to learn something
else. They don't have to
go off and learn C
plus plus, or, or rust
because learning Russ takes a
long time, trust me, I'm
learning it. And they can
just use the tools that
they already know, and they
can build something helpful. And
then it's really easy to
create a package and upload
it to NPM. They can
share it around them. Other
people can contribute back to
it. Is this, is this
a potential place for us
to install viruses or to
have, you know, mean people
put mean stuff in and
I accidentally install something bad.
And then since it's in
my path, it's easy to
run. It totally is a
very good way to do
that, which is makes it
a good thing that I
think pretty much everything that's
on the NPM JS is
open source. And you can
go and have a quick
look at the source. And
I don't know if they've
got any kind of built
in security review or anything
like that. It seems like
the kind of thing that
would hit all the tech
news sites. If somebody discovered
that left pad was mining
cryptocurrency on your machine, every
time you ran it, But
it does allow you to
break stuff really quickly, like
using left Pat as an
example, Yes, you can take
things off the, off the
MPM repository. Although I think
they have done something to
ameliorate that now, but as
far as global tools are
concerned, once you've got that
installed on your machine, it's
there. It's not going back
to NPM. The reason that
left pan broke the world
was because people's continuous integration
processes, do an NPM install
to pull down all the
packages that are being used.
And when left pad went
away, the NPM install failed
and everybody's build started failing.
Hmm. And that's a problem
though. It's a human problem.
And it's always going to
be something that they're going
to work on. Like you
can go up to NPMs
blog and read about their
concerns around malware. And they're
looking for packages with names
that are close to existing
packages so that someone might
install something evil, but to
fault on accident, like off
by one character, you know,
they can do static analysis
on the tools, but ultimately,
you know, human humans are
going to do the best
they can to make sure
that registry stays secure and,
and evil tools don't show
up on our machines. Yeah.
And the, and it has
to be a human thing.
It has to be people
being careful and policing things
and calling it out. If
they notice something is doing
something dodgy  Now you
said that you're learning rust,
but you and I know
each other from the.net community.
And for the longest time,
we were all excited about
and trying to advocate for.net
global tools. So we'd have
the.net equivalent of NPM dash
G and it's finally, it's
finally happened. It has its
with dotnet core 2.1, it's
become a real thing. So
if you've got dotnet core
SD K K 2.1 point
300, although you should have
2.1 point 400, cause that's
the current version and that's
the LTS release, but yes,
you know, have a.net tool
sub command and you can
say.net tool, install dash dash
global, and then give it
a new get package name,
and it'll go off and,
and get that new get
package and then add it
to your path with the
name that the package publisher
chose for it. . Now,
if I go to the
command line right now and
I type.net Space, Mark, it,
We'll say, you know, can't
run.net, hyphen Mark, as if
dotnet hyphen Mark dot exe.
It was a thing. Yeah.
So that's the first way
that it tries to find
something. When you say.net and
the command, you can add
sub commands onto.net by putting
a.net dash, whatever you want
it to be. And it
has a set of directories
that it'll automatically scan to
see if it can find
that. And it'll go and
look through CS proj files
and find the thing that's
being invoked and then see
if it can find it
in your library cache and,
and so on, but.net tool.net
global tools, it goes a
bit beyond that. Okay. So
it's not as simple as
put an executable called, you
know, dotnet hyphen Scott in
the past. It's more sophistical
No, it is more sophisticated.
So when you publish your
new get package with your
global tool in it, you
add a few extra parameters
and you decide what, what
it wants to be invoked
as, and you set a
thing to say, this is
a parameter. And then the
dotnet tool installer, which goes
off to new gets does
a few extra things when
it pulls that package down.
Okay. Do we need to
think about versioning? Is there
a dotnet tool update yet?
Or is this just a
big, There is a.net tool
update, which updates to the
latest stable version and by
stable version. I mean, it
doesn't have dash preview or
dash beater or anything on
the end of it. Okay.
So Donna tool updates. So
I have lifecycle have gotten
it to a list, install
and install and update, and
I'm treating them like their
new get packages because they
are in fact new good
packages. Yes. The name that
you give the tool is
the name of the package
on, on the new gate
repository. It sounds like Probably
be a bit of a,
of a gold rush to
try to get people to
jump in and get the,
the short commands. Like if
I want.net tool Mark, I
grabbed it before some other
Mark does a yes, it
seems to be sort of
picking up slowly. And there's
not a huge number of
tools up there just yet,
but I can see people
wanting to get in there
with something, if they've got
a funky, short name and
actually while we're at it
in your sort of other
job as a PM, whatever
you are on the ASP
net team, could you get
them to shorten the name
of.net ASP net dash code
generator? Because I type that
a lot and it's a
very long word. Well, that's
an issue Points. so.net, hyphen
ASP, net hyphen code generator
is really long and that
is the new get package
name, right? It is also
coincidentally the short name, which
is ironic because it's not
short at all. And that's
something that I think we
as a community are still
trying to figure out, like
Another example would be the
cake build system, which would
be cake dot tool. Unfortunately
they made their short name.net.
Hyphen cake should just be
regular just cake. I don't
think there was anything already
called cake on most people's
systems. Cause obviously that's, you
know, you're not just competing
against everybody else on the.net
global tools. You're competing against
everything that's already available over
apt. And anything else that
can install command line commands
onto your system? Yeah. It's
a tough one. Like if
you go and pick a
word like hash or script
or depends, you could pretend
The squash, other people that
care about that. And that
can be an issue. Yeah.
And you have to be
aware of what's available on
different systems as well. So
Linux boxes tend to come
out of the box with
a base 64 command. So
if you try to publish
a.net core global tool for
doing base 64 things, you
would probably clash with that.
And then it just comes
down to which comes first
in the path as to
which one's getting invoked. So
you need to be quite
careful when you pick these
names. Okay. But that does
sound like it's a little
bit of a wild West
right now, but at the
same time, we don't want
a lot of regulation at
this point because it will
slowly, Pete would slow people
down. Yeah. You want to
have people get out there.
And I actually had someone
ask me the other day,
if I could pass over
a new, get package name
to them because they've got
a new package that does
something completely different. And it's
a really nice name it's
flux, which I necked Whoa,
way back, back in the
old windows. And yeah, he
wants to publish something called
flux and I need to
get back to him and
say, yes, of course you
can have that because it's
just an experimental thing. Right?
You just, you work as
a community, you have these
kinds. Yeah. That's it. You,
people can get in touch
with you through new gate,
as a website or a
way of saying contact owner.
And he clicked that button
and sent me a very
nice, polite message. And I
have very rudely not replied
to it yet, but I
will. Hey folks, Intel is
a sponsor this week and
I welcome them because they're
bringing some high performance developer
tools for all of us
check out Intel's parallel studio
X, E I've talked about
parallelism before on the show
and the importance of using
the complete set, unlocking the
power of the process or
that your code is running
on. Now, you all might
be writing C or C
plus plus Python or even
Fortran, but as your code
building in such a way
and written in such a
way that it uses the
latest techniques for vectorization multithreading
multi-node parallelization or memory optimization,
Intel parallel studio XE has
a lot of new stuff
for 2018 across all these
languages, get a free download
at  dot com slash
parallels studio Z, or certainly
go and Google or Google
with being for Intel parallel
studio XC and get started
boosting your app's performance with
smart parallel code with a
lot less effort, check them
out. bitly.com/parallel studio X E.
Well, so we have this
in dotnet global tools. We
had this in node, but
it was something that happened
in the development community. Even
before this, would you say
it was gems and Ruby
that started this global tools
concept? I would, I think
I might be risking the
wrath of the Python crowd
plugs and had easy install
and PIP. Yeah. But I
think the first thing that
I saw myself that did
this was Ruby gems. And
you would say Jim in
the stall global rails, for
example, and then that actually
added, I think it was
just R or you aliased
it or something, but yeah,
you would just say rails
generate or R G a
and then generate a controller
or a view over active,
active record model or whatever
people were typing very, very
long commands with complete model
declarations in them. But yes,
and SAS is another example
that was originally written in
Ruby and distributed as a
gym. And that was a
global tool. So why would
I want a global tool
and not a project level
tool? Why wouldn't I want
all my projects to have
their own separate tools and
then have everything scoped that
way. So I don't worry
about breaking global paths and
everything would just be held
with the project. And I
would give you the project
and you would get the
tools that my project cared
about. So that's, that's still
available. That's still an option
and it's a perfectly decent
option. There are things. So
for example, the first global
tool that I created and
published is called unpackage, a
UN PKG. And I started
out before it was a
global tool. It was a
project level tool. And you
actually have to open up
the CS proj file and
add a dotnet CLI tool
reference rather than a package
reference. And there's no simple
command line way. There's no
simple visual studio or running
either way of adding a.net
CLI tool reference to a
project. You have to go
in, edit it. So that
makes things slightly difficult. And
then you've got that, that
only works in that one
project and you have to
type.net space and then unpackage,
and then the rest of
the things. So as soon
as global tools actually became
sick, I think it was
literally the day after they
went RTM with.net core 2.1,
I published an updated version
of the package, which put
it in as a global
tool, which means whatever project
I'm in. I don't have
to start install anything. I
can just say unpackage and
jQuery. And it does everything
for me. So it's just
a lot more convenient than
having to do the same
thing over and over again.
What if you, You gave
me your project though, and
maybe it had some associated
scripts with it, and then
I don't have those tools.
What's the best way for
me to get up to
speed. It's possible probably something
in the read me saying,
run this, There, there isn't
a, I typed dotnet build.
And this project depends on
these five tools, go and
get them. I would say
it would be a bad
idea to put things into
your build scripts, into your
targets files or your CS
props files or anything that
rely on dotnet and global
tools to run. So again,
talking about unpackage, when it
was a local tool build
step to do the restore
was just execute this shell
command and it was.net unpackaged
restore. Once I changed it
to being a global tool,
I didn't want people to
have to have that global
tool installed, but I still
wanted the restore on build
functionality. And so I created
another new get package called
rental labs.unpackaged.build, which is a
build time package that does
the restore published that and
then added a command line
option to unpackage to say,
add, build time restore. So
if you clone my repository
and it's got an unpackaged
adjacent file in it, and
then you hit build, it
will do the restore because
it's using a package reference
rather than a.net CLI tool
reference to handle that. I
see. Would you call that
a best practice? Is that
something that other people should
emulate or would you just
call that something you've figured
out in our inner? Not
quite sure if it's the
best I suspect it's the
best practice. It's certainly any
more tools that I create
that require some kind of
build time process. I will
be doing the same thing
and I will be doing
it now by copying and
pasting from my unpackaged doc
build script. The first time
I did it, I copied
and pasted from something Mads
Christensen, because writing build packages
is really complicated and not
well documented. So I had
fun with that. Hmm. It
does sound like a best
practice though, because I think
we all agree that someone
needs to be able to
go and clone a repository
and type.net build and have
it be successful without a
lot of initial setup and
ceremony. Yeah. And we saw
this happen with, with mode
and NPM as well. So
TypeScript when TypeScript 1.0, came
out, you would install it
globally and it would have
to be installed globally for
the bills to run and
say, you had to put
in things saying, you have
to install TypeScript before you
can build this project. And
because there are a lot
of these build time things.
So you likely got TypeScript
and SAS and a web
pack and fire and all
these other things going on.
And so now NPM provides
similar to the old style
of.net tool. You can install
type script as a dependency
within the project. So it
gets restored. And then you
can say NPM Ts or
there's an NPX TSC. Now
I think which lets you
run commands that are installed
in the project locally. So
it's, it's a kind of
weird reverse thing. Dot net
core 2.1 added a feature
that node had had for
ages and node quite recently
added a feature that a
dot met had out of
the box. Not that core
had anyway, do you think,
I think that this is
something that's going to fundamentally
change.net for the better. Do
you think that this is
like the beginning of something
big or does this just
a small few Teacher that
we're enjoying right now? I
really hope it's going to
make a difference and encourage
people to build more command
line tools. I'm working on
a, a set of video
training courses@themomentfor.net core 2.1 and
microservices and all sorts of
other stuff. And that is
going to start with a
thing saying I've written some
tools that will make this
easier for you to follow
along with. So why don't
you go and install those?
And it's going to be
a very command line and
visual studio code focused way
of building dotnet core applications.
So I want to make
it as easy as possible
to do things from the
command line. And there's quite
a lot of repetitive stuff.
So for example, I want
to do something that makes
it easy to upgrade a.net
core 2.1 templated project to
use bootstrap four instead of
bootstrap three, to go through
and rip through your layout
dot CSS, HTML and so
forth. Yeah, it's tough. It's
tedious. Like that should not
be tedious. No it shouldn't.
And I don't want people
to be doing my video
training course, which is supposed
to be fun and interesting
and entertaining and have me
go, right. So delete all
the script references from your
layout file and then replace
them with these ones here,
which you can't even copy
and paste because this is
a video and you know,
it's just hideous. So just
say, download this global tool
and then just run it
in your project. There is
a list of global tools
at Nate McMasters get hug.
Nate McMasters works on global
tools and he's building quite
a list of several dozen
extremely useful. Yeah, I've got
a couple on there. So
package is on there. It's
questionable whether unpackage is going
to continue because the lip
matte library manager, Microsoft tool
is providing a lot of
the same functionality now, but
I always like it. A
lot of people get upset
when Microsoft come along and
do a version of something
that they were doing. And
I can understand that for
bigger things where, you know,
maybe you're building a business
around it and it's an
important part of that. But
for me personally, with a
lot of these things that
I do to scratch my
itch, if Microsoft thing come
along and go, Hey, we've
done the same thing. I'll
go cool, thank you. And
start using that. Hmm. Now
you don't have to worry
about yours. Exactly. I've got
many, many things that I
want to be working on.
So anyone doing other stuff,
other versions of it is
great, but the other, the
other one I've got, and
this is the nice thing.
The thing that I think
is really nice about this,
I use JetBrains rider and
I install it through the
JetBrains toolbox and I have
a nightly build that updates
itself every single day. And
I want to be able
to start it from the
command. I don't want to
be able to say writer,
thingy dot SLN and on
Linux and Mac. For some
reason, there's a tools option
in the menu to say,
create command line and you
just click that. And then
you can run writer from
the command line. It doesn't
work on windows, it's not
there. And so I just
wrote this very, very quick
console application. And all it
does is it looks in
your toolbox folder and it
finds the most recent version
of Ryder and it runs
it with the SLN file.
So to put it differently,
they have a bug on
adding themselves to the path
on windows. And you got
tired of waiting and made
a tool for it. Yes,
that's fine. Awesome. And it
was really quick and it's,
you know, it's only had
like a few dozen downloads.
I think I don't care
it's it's for me. And
I made it cause I
wanted it and I published
it onto new get. And
so anytime I said, I
get a new machine or
wants to do something on
a new machine, then I
can just say dot that
tool I G writer and
it brings it down and
puts it on the machine
for me. And that's a
good reminder too, to us
who are listening, that we
can write these tools as
well for people who are
excited about open source. Certainly
this is a way to
get involved, but there's no
requirement for someone to go
and make these things public.
They could be on your
private knew yet and they
could be used at your
company. Absolutely. And, and I
know a lot of companies
are doing that where they've
got sort of paid, hosted,
might get feeds or they're
running something like Artifactory and
they're using that to publish
and share tools around the
place as well. And I
think the thing that I
would really want to say
to people who were thinking
about doing this is go
and look on my rental
labs, get hub organization and
find the writer thing in
there. It's tiny, it's like
50, I think it's 50
lines of code. And most
of those are navigating directories
and checking that things are
in where they're supposed to
be. To be fair. I
was looking at the code
and it could have been
20 it's just that you
were being extremely clean about
it. And you looked inappropriate
folders. You even supported three
different operating systems just to
be sure. You know, it's
pretty, but it's a pretty
great example of a good
starting place for a simple
tool. Yes. And I think
the first version probably was
about 20 lines because in
that GitHub repository, you can
see issues from people going,
I put in a, an
error message that said something
can't be done, but if
this makes you sad and
then have a link to
my issues page. And so
I got lots of people,
opening issues going, this makes
me sad. But yeah, the
point is it's so easy
to do this. So you
literally beyond the sort of
having to put package IUD
and description and license acceptance
and everything else, you need
to add two properties to
your CS proj file as
a Packers tool, true, which
you have to put in
and then a tool command
name attribute, which is what
people will type to invoke
it. So it's really absolutely
minimum effort and it doesn't
have to be this big,
long, complicated thing, like.net itself
for like a get or
something where it supports a
dozen sub commands on each
of those has got another
dozen sub commands. It can
just be something that does
one thing. And you thought
I I'm so fed up
with typing these three commands.
Every time I do something,
just wrap it up and
put it in as a,
as a.net tool. And then,
you know, if it gets
traction and people like using
it, then go back and
make dash dash help work.
Cause that's always, but in
the short term you do
one thing and you do
it well. Absolutely. Which I
believe was the Unix philosophy.
It is, isn't it well,
fantastic. I'm excited that people
will hopefully start to learn
about and create their own
dotnet global tools. And hopefully
they'll check yours out and
we can go to Rendell
labs.com. I'll put a link
in the show notes and
people can learn about your
courseware. That's coming up soon.
Yes. Thank you. That'd be
great. This has been another
episode of Hanselminutes and we'll
see you again next week.
.